.TH SIC 1 "March 2026" "sic 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
sic \- userland package manager for ~/.local
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sic
.RI [ global-options ]
.I command
.RI [ command-args ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B sic
installs, upgrades, and removes packages under a user prefix without touching the system.
On Unix it reads system package databases best-effort (for example dpkg, pacman, Alpine apk, Homebrew Cellar) to satisfy dependencies with system packages when possible.
When no supported database is present or readable, the system package set is treated as empty and resolution uses only sic packages.
.PP
Add the sic bin directory to your
.B PATH
so installed binaries are available, for example:
.PP
.RS
export PATH="$HOME/.local/sic/bin:$PATH"
.RE
.PP
Use
.B SIC_ROOT
or
.B \-\-prefix
to choose a different installation root; add
.B $SIC_ROOT/bin
(or
.BI prefix /bin\fR)
to
.BR PATH .
The user is responsible for
.B PATH
order: put the sic bin directory first if sic-installed packages should take precedence over system ones.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.BI sic install " name " [ names\&...]
Resolve and install one or more packages by name.
Uses package definitions from
.B \-\-packages
(default:
.IR prefix /packages
or
.BR ./packages ).
On success, writes
.B sic.lock
under the prefix (or to
.B \-\-lockfile
if set) to record installed packages that match the catalog.
.TP
.BI sic upgrade " [name]"
Upgrade one named package, or omit
.I name
to upgrade all installed packages.
On success, updates
.B sic.lock
the same way as
.BR install .
.TP
.BI sic remove " name " [ names\&...]
Remove installed packages.
Fails if dependents exist unless
.BR \-\-force .
.TP
.B sic status
List installed packages with versions.
Human-readable table by default; with
.B \-\-output json
or
.B \-\-output toml
for machine-readable output.
When a lockfile is in use, human output shows locked vs installed; machine output includes
.B lockfile_status
(match, mismatch, not_in_lockfile) and optional
.BR locked_version .
.TP
.BI sic resolve-only " [name]"
Run the resolver only and print the plan; no fetch or commit.
With an optional
.IR name ,
plan an install; without, plan an upgrade-all.
.TP
.B sic doctor
Check prefix layout, lockfile vs installed state, and broken symlinks.
.TP
.BI sic search " [pattern]"
List available packages from the packages directory (no install).
Optional
.I pattern
filters to names containing the string (case-insensitive).
.TP
.BI sic info " name"
Show manifest metadata for
.I name
from the packages directory (every catalogued version).
Human-readable by default; use
.B \-\-output json
or
.B \-\-output toml
for machine-readable output.
.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-prefix " PATH"
Installation prefix (default:
.B SIC_ROOT
or
.BR ~/.local/sic ).
.TP
.BI \-\-packages " DIR"
Directory containing package definition files (default:
.IR prefix /packages
or
.BR ./packages ).
.TP
.BI \-\-lockfile " PATH"
Use this
.B sic.lock
for strict or flexible resolution (optional; otherwise
.IR prefix /sic.lock
may apply).
.TP
.BI \-\-lockfile-mode " MODE"
.B strict
or
.BR flexible .
Default is
.BR strict .
With
.BR flexible ,
allow upgrades that still satisfy constraints (e.g. for
.BR upgrade ).
.TP
.BI \-\-output " FMT"
Output format for failures and
.BR status :
.BR human ", " json ", or " toml
(default
.BR human ).
.TP
.B \-\-dry-run
Only resolve and print the plan; do not fetch or commit.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Verbose resolver and fetch logging.
.TP
.BR \-y ", " \-\-yes
Non-interactive: assume yes for prompts; suitable for scripts.
.TP
.BI \-\-color " WHEN"
When to color output:
.BR auto ", " never ", or " always
(default
.BR auto ).
.TP
.BI \-\-shadowing " POLICY"
When a planned install or upgrade would provide a sic package whose name also exists in the detected system package set:
.BR warn
(print a warning to standard error; default),
.BR error
(abort with exit status 3), or
.B ignore
(silent). Same as environment variable
.BR SIC_SHADOWING .
.PP
For
.BR remove ", " \-f
and
.B \-\-force
remove packages even if other packages depend on them (may leave broken dependencies).
.SH LOCKFILE
When
.B sic.lock
exists (under the prefix or via
.BR \-\-lockfile ),
resolution can be strict or flexible:
.TP
.B strict
Only versions (and revisions) recorded in the lockfile are allowed.
Use for reproducible installs.
.TP
.B flexible
Allow upgrades that still satisfy constraints while respecting the lockfile.
Use for
.B upgrade
workflows.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SIC_ROOT
Default installation prefix when
.B \-\-prefix
is not set.
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
When set, disables color for
.B \-\-color auto
(same idea as common CLI conventions).
.TP
.B SIC_SHADOWING
Same values as
.BR \-\-shadowing :
.BR warn ", " error ", or " ignore
(default when unset:
.BR warn ).
.SH FAILURE OUTPUT
On resolver failure (unsatisfiable, conflict, cycle, not in lockfile, has dependents),
.B sic
prints a structured message to standard error.
Use
.B \-\-output json
or
.B \-\-output toml
for machine-readable diagnostics.
The message may include a suggested action (for example, remove dependents first or use
.B \-\-force
when removal is blocked by dependents).
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Resolver failure (unsatisfiable, conflict, cycle, not in lockfile, has dependents).
.TP
.B 2
Fetch, stage, or commit failure.
.TP
.B 3
Usage error, I/O error, or other failure (including
.B \-\-shadowing error
when the plan would shadow a system package).
.SH FILES
.TP
.IB prefix /sic.lock
Optional lockfile for pinned or constrained resolution.
.TP
.IB prefix /packages
or
.B ./packages
Default package catalog (package definition files).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR dpkg (1),
.BR pacman (8),
.BR apk (8),
.BR brew (1)
.SH AUTHOR
See the project repository for contributor information.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co sic contributors.
License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later.
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
